THE EAGLE FORD SHALE

"The most reliable projections that have been issued to date make it clear that the Eagle Ford Shale is likely to ultimately surpass the East Texas Field to become the largest oil field ever discovered in the lower 48 states in terms of total ultimate oil production." -- Forbes Magazine, March, 2013.

Hydraulic Fracking resulted in over $30 billion dollars invested in the past year alone, making the Eagle Ford Shale the largest single oil and gas development in the world.

What is Hydraulic Fracking?

Hydraulic fracking is the fracturing of rock by a pressurized combination of liquids, or also known as hydro fracturing.  Water is mixed with sand and chemicals, and the mixture is injected at high pressure into a wellbore (any hole drilled for the purpose of exploration or extraction of natural resources) to create thousands of small fractures (typically less than 1mm), along which hydrocarbon fluids such as oil and gas may migrate to the well. Hydraulic pressure is then removed from the well, and small grains of proppant (sand or aluminum oxide) are injected into the fractures to "prop" open the rock.  Since proppant is permeable, oil and gas liquids can pass through and be extracted to the surface.  Fracking is usually conducted only at the start of the life of the well and greatly enhances fluid removal and well productivity.  This technology has transformed the oil exploration business from the historically risky "Wildcatting" process (vertical drilling) into a new economic model where the risk of a dry hole has become virtually non-existent.  Please watch the video below for a visual demonstration of the fracking process. 

fracking video embed code

<iframe width="640" height="360" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/VY34PQUiwOQ" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

url:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VY34PQUiwOQ#t=18

HOW TO PARTICIPATE IN THE EAGLE FORD

There are several ways for an investor to participate in the current oil boom occurring on in the Eagle Ford. 

1.  Stock Purchases of a publicly traded energy company with operations in the Eagle Ford.  This is an easy and indirect way to invest.  However, publicly traded companies are susceptible to unwanted systemic and company specific risks such as earnings warnings or stock market sell-offs. Furthermore, there are no unique tax benefits afforded to these type of equity purchases other than standard capital gain and loss treatments. 

2.  Purchasing Eagle Ford acreage to receive production royalties.  This method is capital intensive and requires expert knowledge in how to obtain good properties and engage operators to drill and produce oil and gas revenue.  Royalty owners do not enjoy the upfront tax benefits of a being a driller/operator and in many cases can experience a drain on cash flow due to high income tax liabilities. 

3.  Investing in the working interest of an oil and gas drilling project.  This is the most practical way for an accredited investor to directly participate in the Eagle Ford.  Working interest owners can enjoy the same cash flow and tax benefits alongside the major drillers and operators without the substantial working capital and expertise required.

What is a working interest in an oil and gas drilling operation?

A working interest is a form of investment in which the investor fully participates in the risks and rewards of a portion of operations of the well.  The price of the working interest represents the costs of exploration, drilling and production and the return is represented by the monthly cash flows generated by the sale of production.  A working interest differs from a royalty in that royalties typically do not have the costs and liabilities of the drilling process attached. However, due to the tax benefits unique to working interests, they can often provide superior returns over royalties of comparable cash flow. 

What are the benefits of a working interest?

(1) Substantial tax deductions.  100% of the intangible drilling costs (IDC’s) associated in proportion with the percentage of working interest owned may be deducted against active income during the year they are paid.  The remaining tangible costs are capitalized and deducted through a depletion allowance over the life of the well.  Prior to April 15th of each year, the project operator is required to issue a written report for each working interest owner containing all the information required for income tax purposes.

(2) High liquidity.  Due to the high production rates which occur the first year of many Eagle Ford wells, initial cash flows have the potential to return most or all of the price of the working interest.  In the case of our current project operator, Primera Energy's most recent completed well is on pace to return 100% of the initial investment within the first 15 months of production. The new "Screaming Eagle" 4-H well has been projected to produce at or above a similar rate.

(3) Long term cash flow.  Interest rates continue to hover around historic lows offering very little return for conservative fixed income investors.  Conversely, the monthly cash flows from a working interest in an Eagle Ford well have to potential to provide substantially higher returns than traditional bond funds without the interest rate risk. (Rising interest rates would be devastating to the value of a fixed income bond fund.)  After the first year of production, typical cash flow rates for the remainder of production (20-50 years) are projected to be as high as 25% of first year’s cash flow.

(4) Low risk.  Innovation in hydraulic fracking techniques have virtually eliminated the risk of a dry hole in proven shale formations such as the Eagle Ford. The primary risks are now just mechanical in nature.  For example, equipment problems and underground water leaks can cause costly delays but are not typically damaging to the long-term profitability of the project.    

(5) Inflation protected return. Physical commodities such as oil and gas provide a hedge against inflation if the value of the dollar should continue to decline.  SRI anticipates inflation to be a significant risk going forward as monetary policies of central banks around the world continue to be loose. 

This webpage is provided for general information only and nothing contained in the material constitutes a recommendation for the purchase or sale of any security. Although the statements of fact in this report are obtained from sources that SRI Diversified Capital considers reliable, we do not guarantee their accuracy and any such information may be incomplete or condensed. Also views expressed in this Report are based on research materials available from sources considered reliable. Views are subject to change on the basis of additional or new research, new facts or developments. The investment risks described herein are not purported to be exhaustive, any person considering an investment should seek independent advice on the suitability or otherwise of the particular investment. Investment products are not guaranteed by SRI Diversified Capital or any of its affiliates or subsidiaries unless specifically stated. Investment products are not insured by government or governmental agencies. Investment is subject to Investment risk, including possible loss of principal amount invested. Past performance is not indicative of future results.  The investor understands that it is his/her responsibility to seek legal and/or tax advice regarding the legal and tax consequences of his/her investment transactions. If investor changes residence, citizenship, nationality, or place of work, it is his/her responsibility to understand how his/her investment transactions are affected by such change and comply with all applicable laws and regulations as and when such becomes applicable. Customer understands that SRI Diversified Capital does not provide legal and/or tax advice and are not responsible for advising him/her on the laws pertaining to his/her transaction.








